Hello there.
This is the Uluru.
And welcome back.
Now let's look at how integer variables can be represented in other less frequently used formats.
So this is something that we have seen in the last lecture and this is how it is commonly used.
So here the Integer Literals, there there were two types of integer literals.
One is integral and the other one is long, literal.
So this is an integer, whereas this one is the long literal, which is ending with a trailing L.
And we also said that individuals can be assigned to variables of all four data types, like in byte,
short and long.
Whereas the long return can only be assigned to a variable of type long.
Right?
So this is what we will see.
Mostly the sort of decimal format.
But these integer literals, like I said earlier, can also be represented in other less frequently
used formats.
And we have seen one example here, one of them is hexadecimal.
And we looked at this integer class where the max and min value were initialized in this format.
These are also intellectuals, but in hexadecimal formats.
So this is a hexadecimal, but we also have binary and also octal.
Octal is perhaps very rarely used and so is not important.
But these other formats also improve code readability in certain contexts.
For instance, here we are representing some very small number and very large number.
So instead of having that number itself, we can represent n the hexadecimal format in this way.
So it improves with code readability.
But like I said, they are very less commonly used.
But in your professional life, if you happen to work on projects where you need to use such kind of
formats, then you know how to use them.
I personally did not have a chance to use them in my professional career.
So let's go ahead and quickly look at these different formats like the binary and the hexadecimal.
So we already have the student class here, but let's not use this.
Let's go back to the other class, the basics demo class, which we have written earlier.
And here let's introduce a new method called primitives.
So let me comment this old print where we were invoking the print method, let's call it as primitives.
Let's write a new method here called primitives because we are dealing with primitives.
And we are calling this primitive method from the main method.
And that's also how.
A print statement.
And let's say inside primitives.
Okay.
Now, one thing that you may have observed here is in student class, we are creating an object of student
and then we are invoking the compute method.
But here we are not creating an object of basic demo we are directly invoking.
That's because this is a type of method called a static method, whereas here it's called as an instance
method.
So those are different types of methods and we will discuss them later.
In fact, we have to still discuss methods itself in a formal way.
So just in case, if you have noticed why basic demo object was not created, that's only because we
are using static methods here, and static methods can be directly invoked from the main method, which
is also a static method, but just don't worry about that for now.
So we are invoking the primitives method here and let's introduce our first variable, let's call it
as int hex and let's initialize it with the number zero zero 41.
So hexadecimal format starts with zero and X and X can be in uppercase also.
So that's the hexadecimal format and this is the hexadecimal number itself, zero zero for one here.
So zero x indicates hexadecimal number.
And if you are not aware of hexadecimal system, then you can read about it later.
But just note that it includes the numbers 0 to 9 and A to F in case you are not aware of it.
And here the variable int hex will be assigned 65 as this hexadecimal number 41 maps to the decimal
65 and you can read about that, how that happens.
But essentially the base here in hexadecimal system is 60 is 16.
So this is the zero position here and the value is one.
So for zero position it will be I'll just quickly show you so that you it will you at least have an
idea.
So it will be 16 power zero because it's a08 position and because we have a one in that position, you
multiply with one, then you will say Plus, then the next position is 16 power one.
And you will multiply with 416 power zero as one and one into one is one and here 16 power one is 16
and times four is 64.
So 64 plus one is 65 and that's what gets printed.
So let's print it.
Index.
So let's compile.
Okay.
So it prints 65 because this maps to 65.
So such hexadecimal formats is very useful and representing very large or very small numbers.
And it is also very useful in performing something called bitwise operations.
And we will also look at bitwise operations later.
So let's not worry about it.
But sometimes in such bitwise operations, it may be even better if we can use binary numbers directly
instead of hexadecimal numbers, and you can also use decimal numbers in bitwise operations, but in
certain low level programming, you might want to use binary numbers instead of hexadecimal.
And using binary numbers is only possible.
Binary letters is only possible from Java seven onwards.
It was not possible before that.
So let's also use the next format, which is the binary format.
So it is only possible from Java seven.
So let me have this and let's call it ain't binary.
So this sort of a naming convention is not good.
We will look at naming conventions later on.
It needs to be much more meaningful, like in this case, like the these kinds of naming conventions
is what you need to use.
But later, we will look at naming conventions for variables and classes and methods, and it will be
clear.
So the binary format starts with zero and B and the number let's use 0100 and 0001.
So that's the binary number with eight digits here.
So this also translates to 65.
So if you compute it, it will translate to 65.
It's just that here, since binary is based two, you would just replace with two here and you would
get the number.
So if you are from non computer science background and do not know how this binary number translates
to 65 then or if you have never heard of signed tools complement scheme, then you can check out the
link I mentioned in the previous lecture, which is included in the resources section of that particular
lecture, and it is all very nicely explained there.
So in this case it will be one times two power zero, which will be one, and this will be zero times
two, power one zero times to power two.
So all of that will be zero, but this will be one times two power six, which is 64.
And that 64 is added to this one, which is one times two power zero.
So that's how you compute the value.
So it will also translate to 65.
So let me recompile.
Execute it so you can see 65.
And you can also have underscores, which was also introduced in Java seven and we looked at underscore
here with phone value.
So similarly, even in these formats, you can use an underscore and it will show the same value.
And these can also be used with long literals to and with long.
We know that it's got to be by a sorry long.
Only then it would compile.
So let's compile and execute this.
Recompile.
And here it is.
So it prints 65.
But this one is a long and here we used this underscore but it still prints 65 so that's just for the
readability sake.
So especially if you have a 32 bit number or a 64 bit binary number, you might want to separate them
after every eight digits for readability and octal is not important at all because it's very rarely
used.
But let me just show you how octal is, just for the sake of completeness.
Let's call it octal here and octal starts with zero and is followed by digits.
So there is no X or B here.
And also keep in mind that this X and B can be in uppercase.
So for octal it starts with zero and there is nothing like character here a letter.
So it just follows with more digits.
So let's have 101.
So this is based eight.
So you would also translate in the same way as here.
It's just that instead of 16, you would use eight.
Here it is.
So it also prints 65.
So that's it.
So these are other less commonly used formats and it's good that you also know about this.
And just keep in mind that the underscore has to be in between the number.
Like I mentioned in the previous lecture, it cannot be at the beginning or at the end.
So that's about it.
Thank you and see you in the next lecture and happy coding.